Add documentation for spring starters (#1035)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation: instrumentation-core/spring/spring-boot-autoconfigure/README.md

# OpenTelemetry Spring Auto-Configuration

> Auto-configures OpenTelemetry instrumentation for [spring-web](../spring-web-3.1/), [spring-webmvc](../spring-webmvc-3.1/), and [spring-webflux](../spring-webflux-5.0/). Leverages Spring Aspect Oriented Programming, dependency injection, and bean post-processing to trace spring applications. To include use all features listed below use the [opentelemetry-spring-starter](../starters/spring-starter/README.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auto-configures OpenTelemetry instrumentation for [spring-web](../spring-web-3.1/), [spring-webmvc](../spring-webmvc-3.1/), and [spring-webflux](../spring-webflux-5.0/). Leverages Spring Aspect Oriented Programming, dependency injection, and bean post-processing to trace spring applications. To include all features listed below use the [opentelemetry-spring-starter](../starters/spring-starter/README.md).
```

## Quickstart

### Add these dependencies to your project.

> Replace `OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION` with the latest stable [release](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.opentelemetry).

Reviewer: I think better to link to official site, e.g. https://search.maven.org/search?q=g:io.opentelemetry

also, we aren't publishing to maven central yet from opentelemetry-java-instrumentation, so maybe include somewhere that for now you need to add our bintray maven repository: https://dl.bintray.com/open-telemetry/maven/

//opentelemetry
implementation 'io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-api:OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION'
//opentelemetry exporter
implementation 'io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporters-otlp:OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION'
```

### Features

#### Dependencies

The following dependencies are optional but are required to use the corresponding features.

Replace `SPRING_VERSION` with the version of spring you're using.
 - Minimum version: `3.1`

Replace `SPRING_WEBFLUX_VERSION` with the version of spring-webflux you're using.
 - Minimum version: `5.0`

Replace `SLF4J_VERSION` with the version of slf4j you're using.

For Maven add to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependencies>
  <!-- opentelemetry exporters-->
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-exporters-jaeger</artifactId>
    <version>OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-exporters-zipkin</artifactId>
    <version>OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>

>     <artifactId>opentelemetry-exporters-logging</artifactId>

Reviewer: did you mean for this to be otlp? (looks like otlp below in gradle config)

also, let's put otlp first in the exporters list, since it's our default

```suggestion
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-exporters-otlp</artifactId>
```

    <version>OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>

  <!-- Used to autoconfigure spring-web -->
  <dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-web</artifactId>
    <version>SPRING_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>

  <!-- Used to autoconfigure spring-webmvc -->
  <dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-webmvc</artifactId>
    <version>SPRING_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>

  <!-- Used to autoconfigure spring-webflux -->
  <dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-webflux</artifactId>
    <version>SPRING_WEBFLUX_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>

  <!-- Used to enable instrumentation using @WithSpan  -->
  <dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-aop</artifactId>
    <version>SPRING_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-extension-auto-annotations</artifactId>
    <version>OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>

>   <!-- Slf4j log correlation support -->

Reviewer: we have this?

Author: Not yet. This work is blocked by this issue: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/issues/922. I left it in as a placeholder. But since logging support is not required for GA I don't think this issue will be resolve in the next few weeks. I'll remove this for now.

  <dependency>
    <groupId>org.slf4j</groupId>
    <artifactId>slf4j-api</artifactId>
    <version>SLF4J_VERSION</version>
  </dependency>

</dependencies>
```

For Gradle add to your dependencies:

```groovy
//opentelemetry exporter
implementation 'io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporters-jaeger:OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION'
implementation 'io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporters-zipkin:OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION'
implementation 'io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporters-otlp:OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION'

//Used to autoconfigure spring-web
implementation "org.springframework:spring-web:SPRING_VERSION"

//Used to autoconfigure spring-webmvc
implementation "org.springframework:spring-webmvc:SPRING_VERSION"

//Used to autoconfigure spring-webflux
implementation "org.springframework:spring-webflux:SPRING_WEBFLUX_VERSION"

//Enables instrumentation using @WithSpan
implementation "org.springframework:spring-aop:SPRING_VERSION"
implementation "io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-extension-auto-annotations:OPENTELEMETRY_VERSION"

//Slf4j log correlation support
implementation "org.sl4j:slf4j-api:SLF4J_VERSION"
```

#### OpenTelemetry Auto Configuration

#### OpenTelemetry Tracer Auto Configuration

> Provides OpenTelemetry tracer bean if a tracer bean does not exist in the application context of spring project. This tracer bean will be used in the all configurations listed below. Feel free to declare your own Opentelemetry tracer bean to overwrite this configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provides OpenTelemetry tracer bean (`io.opentelemetry.trace.Tracer`) if one does not exist in the application context of spring project. This tracer bean will be used in the all configurations listed below. Feel free to declare your own Opentelemetry tracer bean to overwrite this configuration.
```

#### Spring Web Auto Configuration

> Provides autoconfigurations for the OpenTelemtry RestTemplate trace interceptor defined in [opentelemetry-spring-web-3.1](../spring-web-3.1/). This autoconfiguration instruments all requests sent using Spring RestTemplate beans using conditional class loaders and a RestTemplate bean post processor. This feature is supported for spring web versions 3.1+ and can be disabled by adding `opentelemetry.trace.httpclients.enabled=False` to your `resources/applications.properties` file. [Spring Web - RestTemplate Client Span]('#spring-web-resttemplate-client-span') show cases a sample client span generated by this autoconfiguration. Check out [opentelemetry-spring-web-3.1](../spring-web-3.1/) to learn more about the OpenTelemetry RestTemplateInterceptor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provides auto-configuration for the OpenTelemetry RestTemplate trace interceptor defined in [opentelemetry-spring-web-3.1](../spring-web-3.1/). This auto-configuration instruments all requests sent using Spring RestTemplate beans by applying a RestTemplate bean post processor. This feature is supported for spring web versions 3.1+ and can be disabled by adding `opentelemetry.trace.httpclients.enabled=false` to your `resources/applications.properties` file. [Spring Web - RestTemplate Client Span]('#spring-web-resttemplate-client-span') show cases a sample client span generated by this auto-configuration. Check out [opentelemetry-spring-web-3.1](../spring-web-3.1/) to learn more about the OpenTelemetry RestTemplateInterceptor.
```

#### Spring Web MVC Auto Configuration

> This feature autoconfigures instrumentation for spring-webmvc controllers by adding a [WebMvcTracingFilter](../spring-webmvc-3.1/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/springwebmvc/WebMvcTracingFilter.java) bean to the application context. This request filter implements the [OncePerRequestFilter](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/web/filter/OncePerRequestFilter.html) interface to add OpenTelemetry server spans to incoming requests. [Spring Web MVC - Server Span]('#spring-web-mvc-server-span') show cases a sample span generated by the WebMvcTracingFilter. Check out [opentelemetry-spring-webmvc-3.1](../spring-webmvc-3.1/) to learn more about the OpenTelemetry WebMvcTracingFilter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature auto-configures instrumentation for spring-webmvc controllers by adding a [WebMvcTracingFilter](../spring-webmvc-3.1/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/springwebmvc/WebMvcTracingFilter.java) bean to the application context. This request filter implements the [OncePerRequestFilter](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/web/filter/OncePerRequestFilter.html) interface to capture OpenTelemetry server spans and propagate distribute tracing context if provided in the request. [Spring Web MVC - Server Span]('#spring-web-mvc-server-span') show cases a sample span generated by the WebMvcTracingFilter. Check out [opentelemetry-spring-webmvc-3.1](../spring-webmvc-3.1/) to learn more about the OpenTelemetry WebMvcTracingFilter.
```

#### Spring WebFlux Auto Configuration

> Provides autoconfigurations for the OpenTelemtry WebClient ExchangeFilter defined in [opentelemetry-spring-webflux-5.0](../spring-webflux-5.0/). This autoconfiguration instruments all requests sent using Spring's WebClient and WebClient Builder beans using conditional class loaders and bean post processors. This feature is supported for spring webflux versions 5.0+ and can be disabled by adding `opentelemetry.trace.httpclients.enabled=False` to your `resources/applications.properties` file. [Spring Web-Flux - WebClient Span]('#spring-web-flux-webclient-span') show cases a sample span generated by the WebClientFilter. Check out [opentelemetry-spring-webflux-5.0](../spring-webflux-5.0/) to learn more about the OpenTelemetry WebClientFilter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provides auto-configurations for the OpenTelemtry WebClient ExchangeFilter defined in [opentelemetry-spring-webflux-5.0](../spring-webflux-5.0/). This auto-configuration instruments all outgoing http requests sent using Spring's WebClient and WebClient Builder beans by applying a bean post processor. This feature is supported for spring webflux versions 5.0+ and can be disabled by adding `opentelemetry.trace.httpclients.enabled=false` to your `resources/applications.properties` file. [Spring Web-Flux - WebClient Span]('#spring-web-flux-webclient-span') showcases a sample span generated by the WebClientFilter. Check out [opentelemetry-spring-webflux-5.0](../spring-webflux-5.0/) to learn more about the OpenTelemetry WebClientFilter.
```

#### Manual Instrumentation Support - @WithSpan

This feature uses spring-aop to wrap methods annotated with `@WithSpan` in a span.

> Note - This annotation can only be applied to bean methods managed by the spring application context. Check out [spring-aop](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/3.0.x/spring-framework-reference/html/aop.html) to learn more about aspect weaving in spring.

Reviewer: link to newer version :smile:
```suggestion
Note - This annotation can only be applied to bean methods managed by the spring application context. Check out [spring-aop](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/spring-framework-reference/core.html#aop) to learn more about aspect weaving in spring.
```

##### Usage

```java
import org.springframework.beans.factory.annotation.Autowired;
import org.springframework.stereotype.Component;

import io.opentelemetry.extensions.auto.annotations.WithSpan;
import io.opentelemetry.trace.Span;
import io.opentelemetry.trace.Tracer;

/**
 * Test WithSpan
 *
 */
@Component
public class TracedClass {

    @Autowired

>     // Tracer bean is provided by
>     // io.opentelemetry.instrumentation.spring.autoconfigure.TracerAutoConfiguration.java

Reviewer: I think users don't necessarily need to know where in our source code it comes from
```suggestion
    // Tracer bean is provided by spring-boot-autoconfigure
```

    Tracer tracer;

    @WithSpan
    public void tracedMethod() {
    }

    @WithSpan(value="span name")
    public void tracedMethodWithName() {
        Span currentSpan = tracer.getCurrentSpan();
        currentSpan.addEvent("ADD EVENT TO tracedMethodWithName SPAN");
        currentSpan.setAttribute("isTestAttribute", true);
    }

    @WithSpan(kind=Span.Kind.CLIENT)
    public void tracedClientSpan() {
    }
}

```

#### Sample Traces

##### Spring Web MVC - Server Span

> ```json

Reviewer: maybe mention what json format this is, e.g. Zipkin?

         "test.hasEvent":'true',
      }
   },
   {
      "traceId":"0371febbbfa76b2e285a08b53a055d17",
      "parentId":"9b782243ad7df179",
      "id":"1a6cb395a8a33cc0",
      "name":"@withspan set span name",
      "timestamp":1596841406182759,
      "duration":2187,
      "localEndpoint":{
         "serviceName":"sample_trace",
         "ipv4":"XXX.XXX.X.XXX"
      },
      "annotations":[
         {
            "timestamp":1596841406182920,
            "value":"ADD EVENT TO tracedMethodWithName SPAN"
         }
      ],
      "tags":{
         "test.type":"@WithSpan annotation",
         "test.case":'@WithSpan(value="@withspan set span name")',
         "test.hasEvent":'true',
      }
   },
   {
      "traceId":"0371febbbfa76b2e285a08b53a055d17",
      "parentId":"9b782243ad7df179",
      "id":"74dd19a8a9883f80",
      "kind":"CLIENT",
      "name":"tracedClientSpan",
      "timestamp":1596841406194210,
      "duration":130,
      "localEndpoint":{
         "serviceName":"sample_trace",
         "ipv4":"XXX.XXX.X.XXX"
      }
      "tags":{
         "test.type":"@WithSpan annotation",
         "test.case":"@WithSpan(kind=Span.Kind.Client)",
      }
   },
]
```

> <!-- #### In Development - Slf4j Log Correlation  -->

Reviewer: oh i c :smile:

|Zipkin Exporter		|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.zipkin.enabled	|true   		|ZipkinSpanExporter
|Logging Exporter	    |opentelemetry.trace.exporters.logging.enabled	|true   		|LoggingSpanExporter

<!-- Slf4j Log Correlation  opentelemetry.trace.loggers.slf4j.enabled		true   		org.slf4j.MDC -->

##### Exporter Properties

|Feature   				|Property   										|Default Value
|---					|---												|---
|Otlp Exporter  	 	|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.otlp.servicename 	|OtlpGrpcSpanExporter.DEFAULT_SERVICE_NAME
|				  		|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.otlp.endpoint		|OtlpGrpcSpanExporter.DEFAULT_ENDPOINT
|				   		|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.otlp.spantimeout		|OtlpGrpcSpanExporter.DEFAULT_DEADLINE_MS
|Jaeger Exporter  	 	|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.jaeger.servicename 	|JaegerGrpcSpanExporter.DEFAULT_SERVICE_NAME
|				  		|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.jaeger.endpoint		|JaegerGrpcSpanExporter.DEFAULT_ENDPOINT
|				   		|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.jaeger.spantimeout	|JaegerGrpcSpanExporter.DEFAULT_DEADLINE_MS
|Zipkin Exporter 		|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.jaeger.servicename	|ZipkinSpanExporter.DEFAULT_SERVICE_NAME

> |				 		|opentelemetry.trace.exporters.jaeger.endpoint		|ZipkinSpanExporter.DEFAULT_ENDPOINT

Reviewer: for the documentation, i think nice to include the real default values
